Music Music
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Noble Goza is a World War II veteran for sure, although by the time he was drafted in 1945, little did he know that the war was about to end.
His 4th Marines Division had been sent to Maui as replacement troops for the 4th Marines survivors returning from Iwo Jima.
While training for what everyone figured would be a ground war with Japan, well, the bomb was dropped.
And soon after, the war was over.
He spent another year in Hawaii, soon was discharged, thinking that he would never ever see combat.
Well, he was wrong.
Fast forward to 1950, when then Marine Reserve Noble Goza was redeployed, this time the fast track to Korea.
He was on an LST to the cliffs of Incheon, then later to North Korea, where his 7th Marines Division was on its way to the Chosin Reservoir when he was wounded and his military service came to a quicker than expected end.
His is a fascinating story of service in two wars, and we welcome Noble Goza to Veterans of the Valley.
Noble, it's a pleasure to have you.
It's a pleasure to know you and to meet you.
You and I got to go on the Lone Star Honor Flight to Washington, D.C.
back in May, and that was a thrill.
We'll talk about that a little bit later on.
We'll have some pictures.
But talk about, you were in high school, I guess, in Houston when you were drafted in 1945.
That's right.
I only liked about six months of graduating, but Uncle Sam had other ideas, so...
Away I went and went through boot camp in Parris Island and training in Camp Lejeune.
North Carolina.
A railroad trip from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
I wound up in Camp Pendleton and from there on over to the 4th Marine Division, which had just returned from Iwo Jima.
I was a replacement.
Right.
And you were just a raw recruit.
You were a jarhead.
That's right.
You were just a young Marine sort of from Houston, Texas.
And all of a sudden you were thinking at the time when you went to Maui, you were training for really what everybody believed was going to be an unwanted and what would have certainly been a bloody ground war in Japan.
Do you remember that time in thinking about where you might be headed and what you might be headed into?
Well, they said that we were going to be going to one of the larger islands in the Japanese group.
Right.
Which one we really never did know.
But that's all right.
We never went.
Right.
Small armed ordinance.
Yes.
But after the war was over, I...
Didn't have enough time to come home, so I was redeployed to a Marine Small Arms Arlington's Depot, two and a half miles from downtown Honolulu.
Well, I guess if you got to serve, that's not a bad place to be.
That's not a bad place.
You eventually did come home.
I did come home.
And you were honorably discharged from the Marines.
And I guess at the time you thought, well, your military service was over.
So you came back to Houston and you went to work for a while, right?
That's right.
I went to work.
And at the time that I left, I had just started training as a bus driver for the Houston Transit.
Right.
Of course, that interrupted about the middle of my training, so when I came back, I started that all back over again, and for a couple of three years after, that was my employment at Houston Transit County.
After you got back from Korea, but let's go back.
No, World War II.
Yeah, from World War II, right.
But you were called up again in 1950 when Korea and
That was pretty much of a fast track, wasn't it?
Because you had already had training in Hawaii.
So when you went to Pendleton in California, you were pretty much just waiting there to get on an LST and go to Korea.
Well, we didn't wait long.
Didn't wait long.
Because they was forming a 7th Marine Regiment.
And I was absorbed into that regiment.
And we was on high seas in less than a week.
You said within 23 days you were... Well, from 23 days from the time I left Houston, we was under machine gun fire in Korea.
In Korea.
Talk about that experience of landing in Korea, the cliffs of Incheon.
It's a very notable and famous part of the Korean conflict.
Well, it's a very unusual place to make a landing.
Right.
The tide goes out and you have about two or three miles of mud flat.
So it has to be timed at the exact time to get up to the wall.
But MacArthur had it all figured out to a fine detail.
And he supervised the timing and everything, and we made the landing at Incheon, went on up through Kempo Airfield, and then through Sewell, and on up towards the 38th parallel.
I want to go back to climbing the wall, because I've heard so many stories about that.
And I realize it's been a long time.
It's been 60 years.
But what do you remember about that?
Had you had training where you were climbing like rope ladders, I guess?
Well, it was rope ladders.
We had some stationary ladders, but mostly rope ladders.
And we were well accustomed to that because that's where we went over the sides of these ships.
Right.
Into the landing craft.
So that really wasn't anything new.
We were just going up instead of down.
And you were going up without realizing what you were going to find when you got to the top.
That's right.
What type of resistance you might have.
our regiment went ashore there was relatively small opposition and we wasn't really in the first wave they didn't really encounter all that much uh opposition right but and we was more fortunate we encountered less so you went into the to the country a certain distance and then you turned things over to the army and then you came back out and you got back on
What type of vessel?
LST.
Back on an LST.
Went around the south tip of Korea, I guess, and upwards to North Korea.
And we waited off shores because the North Koreans had mined the offshore waters there where they thought we might make a landing.
And it took them several days to clear the mines so that we could
go on in, you know, to shore.
Right.
Now, how did you go into shore when you came back on North Korea?
Was that just a regular shore landing?
Yes.
That was just a shore landing.
Well, we really didn't know what we were going to run into.
Right.
We were ready for anything, but it turned out there was relatively small opposition there.
You were a foot soldier headed to the Chosin Reservoir, Able Company, 1st Battalion, 7th Marines, 1st Marine Division, and you were in the 2nd platoon.
We're going to see some photographs here in a moment.
As a matter of fact, let's go to the photographs right now because before we go on, I want to see some of the photographs here.
Here's the first one.
About how old were you in this picture, do you think?
I think I was 19.
You look about 19, like you don't know what you're about to get into.
There you go.
But a good-looking Marine.
Now, this was in Hawaii, right?
Yes, this was at Camp Catlin, the Ordnance Depot.
As the units would break up around the Pacific, they would send their small arms back to our depot, and we would check them, refurnish them.
put them in Cosmo Lane and then go off to different places after that.
And this particular day you had forklift duty.
That's right.
Obviously.
This was during part of your training in August of 1945.
This was with the 4th Marine Division on Maui.
On Maui, right.
I was with the division about eight months before they broke up and all came home.
And I went to Honolulu and they went home.
What do you think you were shooting at there?
Well, it was probably no live ammunition.
It was just maybe a photo op, you know.
Yeah, let's find a good-looking Marine and take a picture of him.
Okay, this is the most remarkable photograph that you have.
And if you can't read at the bottom, I'm going to read that.
Marines move north towards the Yala.
Yala.
and into the Chosin Reservoir area.
First contact and action against the Chinese army took place at Sudang.
And then there's more on that.
This is the second platoon.
And as you can see, that is, you're identified there in this photograph.
And Lieutenant Bradley is to the right.
You say you remember this photograph being taken.
You can remember this.
Talk about where you are, what you're doing there, and sort of this photograph.
Well, we had just broke camp that morning, and I think this was about 7.30 in the morning.
And, of course, the whole company was moving out, and that's me.
You can see my goza nose there.
And Lieutenant Bradley, he was going to put his sea bag in the Jeep,
Of course, he rode most of the way and we walked.
And there were two cameras there, one a steel camera and the other a fellow with an eight millimeter.
And I remember exactly that particular time.
You said you remember the photographer saying, watch the birdie.
Yes.
And then you said something back to him that we can't repeat right now.
That's right.
But you know, you can sort of tell.
Although the picture is a little bit fuzzy, you can sort of tell that you were watching the birdie.
It looked like you were kind of smiling at the photographer there.
And little did I know that three days after that picture was taken, I would be wounded in action on a hill 352.
Now, if I'm right, if I told you right, you really just came across this picture about eight years ago, right?
When you happened to see Lieutenant Bradley or he called you.
He called me.
He's passed away now, but about eight years ago, he called you and said, hey, I've got a picture that you're in.
Yeah.
Well, the chosen few, the fraternal organization that we belong to,
has a website, thechosenfew.com, and from time to time they put new pictures on that website, and I think it was about 9 o'clock one night, the phone rang and it was, I called him Lieutenant Bradley, he stayed in, he retired a major, but Lieutenant Bradley called me and said, go get your,
computer up and going and said, I'll see your picture.
And so that's when I realized that my picture was on the web.
This was November of 1950.
Y'all are pretty bundled up there.
Was it terribly cold?
Well, no.
It hadn't really got into the sub-zero weather then.
Right, right.
Still pretty cold.
Cold enough to where you all are.
Y'all are bundled up there.
And so that's the second platoon, and you're on your way.
This is literally a picture of you becoming a member of the Chosen Few.
right there, because you're on your way to the Chosen Valley.
A remarkable, remarkable photograph, it really is.
Let's move on.
Next picture, I think, is coming up.
There we go.
Now this, tell us about this picture, because this is your dad.
Well, this has nothing to do with the 1950 Marine Corps.
No, no, this is 1920.
This is 1922.
Such a great picture.
My father was a barber.
Uh-huh.
And that's him first chair on the right.
This in the first chair on the right is my father standing behind a man.
I assume he just gave a haircut to you.
And his shop was in the lobby of the Taylor Hotel in Taylor, Texas.
And I haven't been there in years, but
I understand that the old hotel is still standing.
I'll have to check in then.
But that was true to its area, the wood stove and everything, you know.
Well, like I said, this has nothing to do with your service.
It has nothing to do with you.
You weren't even born yet.
But I just thought it was such a great, clear picture.
from the 1920s of your dad, the barber.
You must have been very proud of him.
Okay, let's move on.
Now, obviously, we fast forward quite a bit.
One of the, at the time, Lieutenant Colonel Raymond G. Davis became General Davis.
He was a member of your platoon.
And later on in San Antonio, you had a reunion with him.
Talk about Raymond Davis.
He's a Medal of Honor.
General Davis was...
regimental commander of the 7th Marine in Korea a smaller man in stature but he could do anything and he wound up getting the Medal of Honor and he saved about half of our company from complete annihilation and of course the chosen few we had our
reunions and this was taken at one of the reunions in San Antonio and that's me and my daughter Crystal and General Davis.
Great reunion and a great picture.
We're going to talk about another
fellow Marine also in a moment.
But let's go back now to Korea, the photograph that we saw.
Oh, wait, I'm sorry, we've got more pictures.
I apologize.
We talked about that you were on the Lone Star Honor Flight with us back on May the 1st, or back in May.
And this is a picture of you on board the airplane with your guardian.
And we had a great time.
We did a couple of shows on the Lone Star Honor Flight, and that's where I got a chance to meet you was on the Honor Flight.
And there you are on the plane.
We're headed to Washington, D.C.
And the next picture, I believe, yeah, there you are in front of the World War II Memorial.
Boy, it was hot that day, wasn't it?
It was, yeah.
I mean, that was early May, and it was in the mid-'90s, I believe, that day.
It was a hot day.
at the World War II Memorial.
And then, of course, there you are, former Marine, in front of, I guess a lot of people call that the Iwo Jima Memorial, where its proper name is the United States Marines War Memorial.
And, of course, the flag raising depicted at the top of Mount Suribachi at Iwo Jima.
But anyway, some great pictures there.
Now, I want to go back to that photograph that we saw.
of the platoon marching towards the Chosen Reservoir.
And talk about what happened three days after that photograph was taken on November the 4th.
Well, at that particular day, I think it must have been around 9 or 10 o'clock.
We had orders to secure Hill 352.
Right.
It kind of commanded the supplier out there and they wanted to be sure that everything, there was no enemy at all on that.
But then all of a sudden we started getting fire.
Terrific fire.
And we got pinned down for a while.
One of our BAR men got into position and I think there was three machine gun nests, enemy machine gun nests, ahead of us.
And he wiped out one, but there was two left.
that we was in grave danger.
Yes, sir.
They really had us pinned down.
And so 1st Platoon Sergeant Poynter.
James Poynter.
He saw the seriousness of the situation.
He grabbed an automatic weapon and charged him.
with complete disregard to his safety.
He picked up several grenades from wounded Marines as he went.
He obliterated the two machine gun nests, but he was wounded, mortally wounded in that attack.
And for that he received the Medal of Honor.
Right.
And I had the honor myself of help carrying his body back to the aid station.
Indeed, remarkable story.
And I want to mention that there is a website and it is
www.chosenfew.com.
It gives the complete history of The Chosen Few.
There's a digest that comes out a few times a year called The Chosen Few.
The article you gave me describes the battle that you just described so well.
But then after that firefight, later on that evening, coming back down,
is when you were wounded.
Talk about how you were wounded.
Well, we secured the hill.
We came down to the road in a very deep valley.
The bottom of the valley was a river, a road, and then steep sides on either side.
Well, we had moved on up and it was dusky dark.
Right.
And we came to a place and about, I think about 200 yards ahead was a sharp right hand curve.
We couldn't see around it.
Lieutenant Bradley said, I want two volunteers.
Goza, you and somebody else.
We immediately was volunteering.
So we went on up and immediately when we rounded the curve, we came under automatic weapon fire.
I was hitting the leg along with another buddy of mine alongside of me.
It was a ricochet.
And we had humongous rocks all around us.
Right.
They drove me and another boy around to behind the rocks and by that time it was just whining off the far side.
But it became dark and pretty soon here came a jeep and got us back.
It took them four days to get the wounded back
to where we had made the landing at Hung Nam.
We went on board the hospital ship Hope, and that's where I operated on.
They got the fragment out, and I went on back to Japan.
Before that, you were just at a first aid station, where you said that the Red Cross pretty much was an aiming point for the Chinese, right?
Well, yeah, we had what they call the Cracker Box ambulances,
The Red Cross emblem was just an aiming point for North Koreans and the Chinese.
Right, right.
So, but your wounds were severe enough to where you could not continue in battle, and eventually you were sent back home.
Yes.
You were sent back home, and that was the end of your combat career, and you were eventually discharged for the second time.
From the U.S.
Marines.
We've got a few minutes left, and I want you to talk about sort of your post-military career.
Talk a little bit about that.
You said that you did a little bit of everything.
You were a machinist.
That's right, but let's go back to when I was discharged the last time.
Okay, go ahead.
When I was in the hospital at Japan, a lieutenant come around and said, Goza, you got the Purple Heart, but we run out.
That's right, and I was going to get to that.
Go ahead.
No, go ahead.
You tell the story.
So he said, go ahead.
We're going to get you back to the States.
And when you get discharged, well, I'm sure they'll have Purple Heart there.
Back to Treasure Island, discharged.
Sergeant said, go, we're out of Purple Heart.
So many got them, we just run out.
Still no Purple Heart.
And he said, if you can wait four or five days,
We'll have them.
Right.
I said in four or five days I can be eating mama's apple pie.
So I went on home and that's the way it was left.
With no purple heart.
However.
However, yes.
We fast forward quite a bit to just a few years ago, not that many years ago, I should say, and a ceremony at a local elementary school.
No, A&M history class.
A&M history class, that's right.
Talk about that because it was covered by local television, and talk about what happened that day.
Well, for some reason, unknown reason to me, somebody discovered that I never received a purple art.
Right.
And so Dr. Arnold Kramer, history professor at A&M, whenever his class gets to the point where he's on the Korean class,
part, he turns the complete class over to the members of the chosen few to enlighten them on the real history of Korean conflict.
So when that was over, he said, those will come up.
And at that time, I discovered what a Marine Corps major was doing there.
This was a complete surprise to you, right?
A complete surprise.
Right.
So 43 years after the fact, I received a Purple Heart.
You did.
You did, you received your Purple Heart and it was a total surprise and I got to see your Purple Heart the other day and indeed it looks newer than most Purple Hearts that were awarded to World War II veterans.
I will say that because it is newer.
Personally, after you returned from World War II, before you went to Korea, I believe you were married at that time and have two children from that marriage, I believe, and your first wife died in 1978.
And you were remarried, and a very wonderful thing happened to you when you were 61 years old.
Well, I remarried after two years.
I said, this is not for me.
And I remarried a younger lady, much younger than I. And I think we'd been married about four years.
And when I was 62.
62.
We had a little girl.
How about that?
And she's 24 years old now?
She's 24 years old right now.
She's an LVN nurse at the Prazos Valley Woman's Clinic.
Went to Blinn?
Went to Blinn.
First she wanted to be a musician, and then she decided she wanted to be a nurse, right?
And she went to Blinn, and she's working here right now, and she's 24 years old.
So, yeah, you were...
You were 80 years old, I guess, when she graduated from high school, I guess, just about, right?
Well, congratulations on that.
Talk a little bit about, though, your career.
You're a machinist.
You make stuff.
And you had a long career with a lot of companies, but the UT Medical School was really your last job where you worked.
Yes, that's right.
When the financial bottom fell out of the oil industry,
industry in the early 80s, there was no job for machining.
Right.
So I see this ad in the Chronicle, wanted
Manager for Instrument Machine Shop, University of Texas Medical School.
And that's where you went.
I wish we could talk more about it, but we are out of time.
But we've talked about your military career and a great one it was, and thank you for your service.
Appreciate it.
Thank you, Noble.
All right.
Brief service in World War II, a Purple Heart earned in Korea, a remarkable post-military career, and a new dad at age 61.
And at only 85 years old, you get the idea that Noble Goza's life still has stories to tell.
We salute him for his service as a United States Marine.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.